# PREFACE

*Learn to Read Latin* is an introductory grammar and reader in one. The aim of this book is to help students acquire as quickly as possible an ability to read and appreciate the great works of Latin literature. Respectful of both teachers and students, the book assumes a serious interest in learning Latin well and thoroughly. 

*LTRL* grew out of an earnest wish to make available to others the immense pleasure we have both experienced in reading Latin literature in Latin. For many years it has seemed to us that too much emphasis has been placed on teaching students to translate Latin and that even the most diligent Latin students have attained too little intimacy with the Latin language and the styles of great Latin writers. Many beginning Latin books expect students to translate several volumes of stories in Latin written not by ancient authors but by the authors of the books themselves. This seems to us an inefficient use of student energy and a pedagogical method of limited value if one's goal is to prepare students to read and appreciate Caesar, Cicero, Livy, Vergil, Horace, and so many others. 

In addition, we have noted how often introductory books present tidbits of information about Roman domestic life and culture, while failing to provide students with information about the many authors and literary works that will become available to them as their proficiency increases. In our experience this has meant that many students choose not to continue their studies beyond the introductory level in part because they are unaware of what they might read at the intermediate and advanced levels. We have tried to create a beginning Latin book that relies primarily on the ancient authors themselves as the means by which students may learn about Latin syntax and style. We have sought to introduce students to the Latin literature that for many will be the focus of their later studies, and we firmly believe that the best introduction to Roman culture is through the reading of as much Roman literature drawn from as wide a variety of authors as possible. 

*LTRL* owes much to the two texts written for use at the Brooklyn College of CUNY Latin/Greek Institute, *Latin: An Intensive Course* by Floyd L. Moreland and Rita M. Fleischer, and *Greek: An Intensive Course* by Hardy Hansen and Gerald M. Quinn. Both books were designed for rapid-paced summer courses in which a new unit is covered each day. Both are models of clarity, efficiency, and completeness. From Floyd Moreland, who was our teacher and colleague, we learned the importance of the order of presentation of points of grammar and morphology and the value of brief, clear explanations. He imparted to both of us his own deep interest in Latin syntax and style. He taught us to go in order when reading and translating, to care about the smallest details, and to love Latin literature. His powerful presence informs much that is good in our book. From Hardy Hansen and Gerry Quinn we borrowed the idea of placing numbered observations below presentations of morphology and syntax, and we modeled our vocabulary notes on theirs, including a considerable amount of linguistic information, as they did in their Greek book. 

Since *LTRL* was not written to meet the special requirements of an intensive summer course, our book departs from its forebears in several important ways. The chapters are longer and present whole systems or closely related elements of vocabulary, morphology, and syntax. Many drills and drill sentences are provided in the workbook for use in class, for homework, and for extra and remedial work with individual students. Certain points of English grammar and usage are explained at some length, and drills are provided for these as well. Two aims determined the order of presentation of grammatical points in LTRL. We wished to give the student a sense of the logical development of Latin syntax and a steadily deepening understanding. We also wished to provide the earliest possible access to unabridged Latin passages. 

*LTRL* is perhaps the first book of its kind to make extensive use of the Packard Humanities Institute CD-ROM containing much of the corpus of Latin literature up to Justinian. With the aid of this powerful tool we have often been able to establish correct Latin usage for drills and drill sentences, and we have tried to exclude any phrase or piece of syntax not occurring in extant classical Latin. Although there may still be some errors of usage, we believe that the Latin in our book that has been written by us resembles what students will read in the ancient authors. We have also used the CD-ROM to locate many passages that well illustrate the vocabulary, morphology, and syntax presented in each chapter of the book. The wide range of authors and texts represented in *LTRL*—including choice passages from authors not commonly read—was made possible in part by this CD-ROM. Several Latin grammars and dictionaries were regularly consulted during the writing of this book, and we relied in particular on *A Latin Grammar* by George M. Lane and *A New Latin Syntax* by E. C. Woodcock. For vowel quantities in Latin words we have consulted *Lateinisches Etymologisches Wörterbuch* by Walde and Hofmann. 

## PREFACE TO THE SECONDED EDITION OF THE TEXTBOOK

*Learn To Read Latin* was first published in 2003. We now welcome the opportunity to present a revised edition based on the observations and suggestions of adopters and users of the first edition. We are grateful for their aid. Corrections have been made throughout. Editing and rewriting in the vocabulary notes and the syntax and morphology sections are intended to streamline and clarify presentations. A new section on indefinite pronouns and adjectives (previously presented only in the vocabulary notes) has been added to chapter XIV. Three chapters (VIII, IX, and X) have been substantially changed and their contents rearranged to create greater balance of presentation. Some vocabulary words have been moved to different chapters, and some new words have been added. Additions, deletions, and corrections have been made in the short and longer readings of each chapter. Chapters II to VI in particular now have more samples of actual Latin to challenge and inspire beginning students. The vocabulary provided for all readings is now presented in the order in which the words appear in readings and not in alphabetical order. 
