# ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Andrew Keller wishes to thank past and present colleagues at Colgate University, in particular Eric Casey, Leah Himmelhoch, and Naomi Rood, who used early versions of the book in both first- and second-year classes, made many helpful suggestions for improvements, caught many errors, and remained even-keeled throughout the experience. Fred Jones, Colgate class of 2003, enthusiastically proofread early versions of the book and found countless small and large typographical errors. Thanks are due as well to departmental colleagues Rebecca Ammerman and Robert Garland for their support of this project over the past several years. 

Stephanie Russell gratefully acknowledges support for the writing of this book provided by Collegiate School, including two generous summer awards: a Wilson Parkhill Fellowship and a grant from the Van Horne Foundation. Special thanks are also owed to colleagues William Abernathy, Phyllis Brugnolotti, Jose Corredor, Lynn Hansell, Paul Ness, and Kathy Sullivan. Phuc Tran was willing to use early versions of the book in his Latin classes, and his many wise and helpful suggestions have significantly improved the book. Barbara Juhel, head of Collegiate's Foreign Language Department, gave kind encouragement over many years and provided an introduction to Yale University Press. 

The authors extend their warmest thanks to the Latin students at Colgate University and at Collegiate School (especially to those in the class of 2004) who used our book, spotted many errors, and offered many good ideas. They have played an important part in bringing the book to its present form. 

Mary Jane Peluso acquired our book for Yale University Press and handled two anxious authors with patience and professionalism. Her assistant, Gretchen Rings, was helpful and attentive to many important details. Our skilled manuscript editor, Dan Heaton, made intelligent and inspired improvements throughout the manuscript. To these three we are sincerely grateful. 

Ann-Marie Imbornoni served as the senior production editor for the second edition of LTRL, and Joyce Ippolito was the manuscript editor. The authors are most grateful for their devoted attention to all the details of the manuscript. Juliana Froggatt was a scrupulous and intelligent proofreader with an eagle eye and a refined sense of style. Thanks to the thorough and careful work of these three professionals, we have been able to avoid many errors and infelicities. Their suggestions and tactful queries have greatly improved our book. 